We will now review the portfolio management workflow and the
importance of the executive governance body.
Like to reinforce again why we are doing this.
Without the PMO,
the business tends to believe that the ultimate goal
is to achieve project success.
Yet it is found that many projects do not fit well with the strategic
initiatives and hence do not represent the best use of resources.
So basically the term does not fit well,
really means to either stop the project,
maybe reduce the resources or merge portions with other projects.
I want to emphasize this since management seems reticent to stop projects.
Remember the ultimate goal is the best allocation of resources,
and maximizing the investment dollar.
Okay, onto a workflow example.
Here is an example of a simple workflow of portfolio management.
You could use this as a starting point and then modify to meet your needs.
First you need to identify and gather the executives you
need to form your executive Steering Group.
They should be members of the C-suite, like the CEO, CFO, COO et cetera.
Plus you want to have the CIO and the CTO as members as well and of
course anyone else that makes sense to join the team.
From that team you will identify and itemize your key
strategic initiatives and projects,
with corresponding data such as business case outcome goals,
target ROI and things like that.
Then your PMO executive team may be some of the same players or a subset,
will follow the governance to find and filter through
the initiative and project proposals.
The results of which is the initiative and project backlog.
The portfolio reviews will groom the backlog,
add new items and discuss feedback from ongoing initiatives and
projects and I'll show you more of that in a moment.
If a project is approved.
We will make a resource allocation and launch a new
project to support an initiative,
or maybe we have to adjust the resource allocation for
an existing initiative or project, either up or down.
Next is portfolio X, which is a container of either projects,
programs and our operations.
There would be a container for each initiative as a way to display it to the
executives or your governance body for easy status reporting.
Now as you can see in this example we have four projects.
Two are going good and are green.
One is red, so that is an issue we need to drill in on,
and project four is yellow.
Now we still may want to drill in on that but we hope that
project is going okay and can be corrected.
Also we have two operational areas,
one and two and again they would reflect actual pieces of the
organization that exists and will likely continue to exist versus
projects that have a start and end,
and in this case there is synergy and a working relationship
between project one and operational area one and between
project two and operational two, and that's why I wanted to show it that way.
So our portfolio project or program managers of those
projects and operational areas, will be feeding information.
That is decision metrics such as value, costs,
risk et cetera,
back to the executive PMO governance for periodic portfolio reviews.
Also you will notice that the communication in this area is bi-directional.
Information,
guidance and decision-making will flow up and down
this chain of responsible parties.
Now let's talk more about executive governance,
which is where I'm now highlighting.
Now let's see who we'd like to have participate in the
executive governance body or team.
You want to be sure you populate the body with key
executives from all parts of the organization.
These are the leaders of the company and are ultimately
responsible for the success of the company as well.
They can come from the board, Steering Groups,
senior executives, and just important business leaders in your organization.
Now let's talk about what we expect from these leaders to
make governance and the PMO even work.
The executive role in PMO governance.
Executives or senior managers are busy people, well who isn't?
But sometimes your attention span is short.
So you will need to sit them down and educate them on what you
expect from them to jumpstart this activity,
and here's a short checklist on what you need to do.
You want to have them avoid informal decisions.
Basically do not launch projects outside of the process and governance.
Sometimes executives or managers are targets of those in the
organization seeking support and funding.
This is not good since it redirects monies away from critical initiatives.
You want to have them avoid pet projects.
If a project is tied too closely to only one executive or manager,
they may not be as objective.
Remember the full team makes decisions, not just one member.
Now of course if the CEO is on the team and he or she has a pet project,
well it's likely to get done.
Okay, that's life.
Now also have them follow the governance process.
Don't work outside the process.
If people go around the process, why even have one?
If the process needs to be changed, recommend changes,
get consensus, update the process and move on.
Think in terms of investment management.
The team is determining how best to spend their investment dollars
for the future of the organization or the company,
and lastly work as a team.
The strength of a team is each individual member.
So take time and care in selecting the right members.
The strength of each member, well, is of course the team. In the next section we'll look at ideas of how we may design our portfolios.